Inheritance is what I consider to be the 1st pillar of Object Oriented Programming because it is, in my opinion, the most important OOP concept because it sets the stage for the rest. There could be no OOP without inheritance. Inheritance is the mechanism of basing an object or class upon another object or class and retaining similar implementation. In other words, inheritance is the grouping and reusing of code between objects that have similar characteristics or have similar functionality. The parent and child will have slight variations and unique methods or functionalities (if they didn’t they would be the same class) but will pass down most or at least some of their characteristics and/or functionality.

I would argue that Encapsulation is the 2nd most important of OOP. If inheritance is the foundation of Object Oriented Programming, then encapsulation would be the walls. Without it, there would be no privacy and, more importantly, no security. If there was no encapsulation then the entirety of the java (or any other OOP language) would be able to be changed which would lead to a very buggy program. Encapsulation is the bundling of data and methods that work on that data within one unit, aka it is the hiding of the internal state of an object from the outside.

Polymorphism is the concept that objects of different types can be accessible through the same interface, each type with its own independent implementation of the interface. It is what makes overloading and overriding possible which increases the functionality of OOP. Finally, the last pillar of OOP is abstraction. Abstraction is similar to a blueprint. It isn’t actively used but it provides a manual on how a class must be used. Abstraction shows only the essential attributes and hides unnecessary information, similar to Encapsulation. I’ll admit, I had trouble realizing the importance of this principle until I started creating a chess game for my capstone, an abstract Piece class made my code much easier to implement. 

Example- my Piece Class. It illustrates multiple pillars of OOP. To start, it is the parent of Pawn, Rook, Queen, Knight, King, and Bishop all. All of these different types of Piece have unique properties but they all inherit from Piece and reuses its functionality. It is also an example of abstraction because Piece is an abstract class. Piece Class serves as a blueprint for all its children but it does not actually function by itself. 

Example 2- my Board Class. It has a private constructor that can only be instantiated once. This is called a Singleton but it also displays the use of Encapsulation because it's constructor is private and can not be instantiated outside the class except through the Constructor Method. Also, all of my code displays encapsulation because all the fields are private. If you wish to read or change any data, it is only possible to do so using getters and setters. 

And my last example will be the Pawn class. I could have chosen any of the Piece children because they all override the parent method which is Polymorphism. Another example of Polymorphism is by overloading a method like with my Move constructor which calls a different constructor depending on whether or not it was a Special move.
